A few months ago, Dr. Richard Davidson at the Center for Healthy Minds released a podcast episode through his online community, the Dharma Lab, where he discussed the effects of artificial intelligence (AI) on the brain. This episode dropped only a few weeks after the preprint release of ‘[Your Brain on ChatGPT](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2506.08872),’ the sensational MIT Media Lab study that quickly garnered attention from influencers, news outlets, and scientific communities across the world.  
At the start of the podcast episode, Richie says something along the lines of, “It's not the Large Language Models themselves. It’s our relationship with them.”  
Hearing this, I was immediately intrigued. Richie Davidson, like the authors of the MIT Media Lab preprint, wasn’t villainizing AI. He was reframing the context in which AI can cause problems. And as a future ‘connections’ researcher, this was an important distinction.  
Based on preliminary research, it is clear that AI affects people on a cognitive and affective level. From a neuroscience perspective, AI is impacting our neural networks in varied ways. Preliminary research has shown how populations that rely more on AI perform worse in a number of cognitive realms. But the important part of the previous sentence is really the word ‘preliminary.’  
AI is not a new field by any means, but its growth trajectory has skyrocketed in the last two decades. Accompanying this surge is a generation of scientists rushing to evaluate the effects of AI on the brain. The ever-changing nature of AI models is making it difficult to tackle this area of neuroscience research. The brain changes over years or decades, while AI tools evolve within months. This makes it hard to design studies that stay relevant for their full duration. Compounding this, most existing research relies on small samples and narrow tasks, and struggles to establish causation rather than correlation.
Consequently, what has been found thus far is mostly from a clinical perspective. It’s become very clear that AI appeals to people in ways an actual human often doesn’t. If you’ve ever asked ChatGPT a question, you may have noticed its tendency to agree with what you say regardless of the corrections you make or the tone you use. This agreeableness offers people a chance to avoid friction or conflict, which is almost always unavoidable in human-to-human relationships. People may also enjoy the chance to exert control over a conversation partner; AI will do whatever you tell it to do. Along these lines, it will also always be a non-judging, non-sentient conversationalist, which can help people feel a sense of freedom in how they express themselves.   
You can tell a Replika or Paradot companion your deepest, darkest secret. But it can be a lot harder to reveal the same thing to your therapist.  
Furthermore, AI doesn’t require or even adhere to clear boundaries. Its purpose to the user doesn’t have to be clarified. In fact, AI can be everything at once—a therapist, a friend, a romantic partner, and even a mentor. This lack of boundaries breaks down the concepts we know are necessary for healthy human-to-human relationships. It’s then reasonable to assume that this type of relationship can also cause shifts in expectations within human-to-human relationships, which is all the more dangerous.  
This pipeline from a human-to-AI relationship to a human-to-human relationship concerns me the most, since it posits the idea that habits built with a non-sentient, non-feeling entity can translate into habits with very sentient, very feeling beings. It can fracture the very foundations of what we know makes social interactions work. The amount of cognitive and affective work we as humans do with one another is arguably more than the amount of cognitive and affective work needed in interactions with AI.   
And perhaps that’s why some people are quick to claim that AI is making us lazy.  
All this to say, once again, it’s not AI that inherently poses a problem. We simply need to apply caution in *how* we interact with the AI models. Given how preliminary current findings are, it would be premature to draw definitive conclusions about AI’s long-term effects on the brain. What can be said with confidence, however, is that significant responsibility ultimately falls on this technology’s creators, its users, and policymakers around the world, who are positioned to construct laws that guide its ethical creation and use moving forward.

