With the emergence of ChatGPT, Artificial Intelligence has been at the forefront of the media. As a result, industries across the board are racing to predict the effects of AI on their job markets, and better yet, on their livelihoods. The literary industry is no different; the writing world has recently become intimately acquainted with the influence of AI.  
While some authors have come forward with their wary support for AI within the literary field, others are staunchly against integration. I thought I’d take a moment to comment on it myself, as not only an author but also a student in university and a future data scientist.  
To what extent should individuals be allowed free speech, and to what degree can ChatGPT or other large language models (LLMs) facilitate their expression? I don’t plan to answer these questions in this article, but akin to all technological development, AI will inevitably be part of a larger debate surrounding one’s autonomy, and I am interested to see what the future holds.  
As a student, I find AI to be both revolutionary and dangerous. Have students begun to exploit AI for academic dishonesty? Undoubtedly. Have students also used AI to refine correspondence with their professors and managers, create to-do lists, and explain difficult concepts in a simpler manner? Absolutely.  
Post-pandemic, the educational landscape stands to be more online than ever before. As adults, university students possess both legal and developmental capacities to decide how AI can affect their education. However, younger students warrant more concern. I fear that the impacts of AI on learning processes can foster a lack of effort and diligence. There is great value in learning how to learn, and AI stands to interrupt such development. Amidst an American education crisis marked by low employee wages and disparities in resources due to political unrest and gerrymandering, it is imperative to nurture literacy, creativity, and critical thinking skills in all young students. It takes a great deal of discipline to not let AI hinder one’s ability to write or think creatively.  
Moreover, there's the issue of AI's inherent lack of originality. Because Artificial Intelligence is trained on data, it falls short of being a true creator. Authors like Margaret Atwood and Jodi Picoult have even signed a letter on behalf of the Author’s Guild, urging AI companies to stop using their work without permission or compensation (NPR).  
As a future data scientist, I see the great value in AI and all that it offers. It will optimize systems everywhere, influence social and political cultures, and alter power dynamics on micro and macro levels. I won’t go into the numerous specific benefits that AI will provide, but I want to note that most data and computer scientists understand the ethical dilemmas this technology poses. Personally, I am interested in how policymakers and governments approach these dilemmas worldwide, and how their decisions will extend to systems within education and law.  
I am neither staunchly for AI or against AI because I believe, like most technology, AI has both benefits and drawbacks. In general, artificial intelligence will prove to be a powerful tool in several aspects, but the coming years will reveal its true role within our world.

Citations:  
The Guardian. (2023, July 20). *Authors call for AI companies to stop using their work without consent*. The Guardian. [https://www.theguardian.com/books/2023/jul/20/authors-call-for-ai-companies-to-stop-using-their-work-without-consent](https://www.theguardian.com/books/2023/jul/20/authors-call-for-ai-companies-to-stop-using-their-work-without-consent)  
